Hi, my name is Brian Caffo and this is the
multiple testing
lecture in the statistical inference class
in the course area data science series.
This class is co-taught by my
collaborators Jeff Leek and Roger Peng.
We're all in the department of bio
statistics
in the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health.
And in fact, today, we have a very special
guest lecturer, Jeff Leek.
I don't have a picture of Jeff so lets
just assume he kind of looks like this.
You know, he sets things like Internet's
rule.
And so, I'll just let him take over from,
from there.
[SOUND].
>> This video is about multiple testing.
We talked about hypothesis testing early
in the course
and I mentioned that we when you perform
more than
one hypothesis test you have to do some
sort
of correction to make sure that you're not
fooling yourself.
This lecture is a little bit about how to
do these corrections.
The key ideas here are that hypothesis
testing in significant analysis.
Are commonly overused techniques.
In particular, what people will often do
is calcula, calculate multiple P values
when
analysing the same data set, and they will
only report the smallest P value
or report all of the P values but claim
all P values less than
.05 are significant which leads to some
problems that I’ll demonstrate in a
minute.
So, what we would like to do is correct
for multiple testing
to avoid false positives or false
discoveries when forming analysis with
many variables.
There are two key components to multiple
testing corrections, first it's
a definition of an error measure that you
would like to control.
Then a, a definition of a correction or a
statistical method that's used to control
that error mesh, measure.
So this is related to three errors of
statics, which appears
in this book by Brad Efron, a professor of
statistics at Stanford.
So he talked about the three errors as,
the first error being when
huge census level datasets were brought to
bear on simple but important questions.
But it just collected a lot of data to try
to describe a population.
Then the classical period of statistics
developed a theory of optimal inference
for ringing as much information as
possible out of small sample sizes.
This is back when data was very expensive
or difficult to collect.
The third era, the era that we're in now,
is the era
of scientific mass production, when data
is cheap and easy to collect.
But this also means that we're performing
more and more analysis.
And if we don't correct for the fact that
all of these analyses are performed,
we're allowing for a small amount of error
in each analysis, those errors can pile
up.
So, the reason for performing multiple
testing corrections are because of
these new technologies that are leading to
this increase in data.
These technologies range from next
generation sequencing machines in
molecular biology,
to imaging of patients in clinical
studies, or electronic medical records.
Or personalized or individualized
quantitative
self-measurements that you might take
with something like the Nike Fuel Band or
the FitBit.
So why should we correct for multiple
tests?
This is actually a cartoon to describe the
key problem that you run into.
So suppose that you were looking at a
particular analysis
where you wanted to see if jelly beans
cause acne.
So what you do is you send off a bunch of
scientists to investigate.
And they first look at just all jelly
beans.
And they look and see if people eat any
kind of jellybeans, whether
they get acne or not and their p value
comes back greater than .05.
And so, the next thing that they might do
is go
and run and tech test all the different
colors of jellybeans individually.
Say, well, is there a relationship between
purple jelly beans
and acne brown jelly beans and acne and so
forth.
And in each case they get a p greater
than 0.05, so they don't report a
significant result.
Until finally after they test over 20
different kinds of
jelly beans they come up with one that is
significantly associated
with acne, green jelly beans and they say
there's only
a 5% chance of coinci, of this coincidence
occurring by chance.
But it turns out that they tested 20
different hypotheses, so it was almost
it became very likely that at least one of
them would result in a coincidence.
So in other words, we allow, if we allow
for 5%
chance of error in every hypothesis test
that we perform, and we
perform at least 20 hypothesis tests then
we expect to find at
least one error because 20 times 5 percent
is about 100 percent.
So I've been referring to p values and
hypothesis testing
as sort of interchangeable ideas but
they're not really interchangeable.
So you can imagine where you're performing
a
hypothesis test for para, parameter beta
and you're
trying to determine whether is equals zero
versus
the alternative that it does not equal to
zero.
>> And so this is an example of when that
might happen
is, say, you're fitting a linear
regression model relating one variable to
another.
If the coefficient for, the variable
that's the,
covariant is equal to zero, then there's
no estimated
association between the two variables, and
if it's
not equal to zero, then there is some
association.
So you might fit that linear progression
model
and calculate a p value, as we've
discussed previously.
And then to perform a hypothesis test, you
might look at
that p value and calculate whether it's
less than some particular threshold.
And if it is less than the threshold, then
you would say that.
Beta does not equal to zero and if it's
above the threshold you might say beta
equals zero.
This is called the hypothesis test.
When you're performing a hypothesis test,
this is
the table of the possible outcomes that
can happen.
So, in each row you have a particular
claim that you might make.
Whether beta is equal to zero or beta is
not equal to zero.
And then in each column you might have the
true state of the
world where beta is equal to zero or beta
is no equal to zero.
So, if you perform lots of hypothesise
tests, all the times when
you say beta is equal to zero, and beta
actually is equal
to zero fall into this cell, and all the
times when you
say beta is not equal to zero, and is not
equal to zero.
And it really not equal to zero but they
fall into this cell.
So then there are two types of errors that
you might make, so the first one type
one errors or false positives are the case
where you say beta is not equal to zero.
In other words you say there is some
relationship between the variables.
But there actually is not a relationship.
So we're going to denote by v the number
of times that happens.
The other type of error, type two errors
or false
negatives are the cases where you might
claim that there's no
that beta's equal to zero, in other words
there's no relationship
between the variables, but it turns out
that there actually is.
In general people tend to focus a little
bit
more on type one errors, or false
positives when performing
scientific investigations as we want to
limit the number of
times that we're led astray, or we find
false positives.
But in general the two error rates might
be compared a different amount depending
on what type
of problem that you're looking at and
whether one
type of error is more costly than the
other.
So in multiple testing there are a couple
of different error rates that we might
consider.
That's the first component of a multiple
testing procedure.
So the error rate in this case it might be
the false positive
rate, so this is just a rate which false
results are called significant.
So in other words these are the results,
beta
equals zero where there's no relationship
between the variables.
What rate do we call them significant?
This is just the average.
Fraction of the times that we call them
significant when they're
not, divided by the total number of not
significant variables [COUGH].
Then there's another error measure which
is called the family wise error rate.
And so, that is just the probability of at
least one false positive.
So, this V variable counts all the times
where there's no
relationship between the variables but we
claim that there is one.
So if we do that V times, the family wise
error rate is controlling the
probability that the number that we Make
that
false claim greater than or equal to one.
The false discovery rate is a little bit
different then
the false positive rate in that it's the
rate at which
claims significance are false in other
words r of the times
we're going to claim that beta is not
equal to zero.
And V of the time we're going to be wrong
about that decision.
So E, the expected value of E divided by R
is actually
just the rate at which our claims that
there's a relationship are false.
So this is the false discovery rate versus
the
false positive rate, which is the rate at
which.
Actually truly false results are called
true.
So, the posi, false positive rate is
closely related to the
type one error rate and it's actually kind
of a subtle distinction.
And if you want to learn a little more
about
that I have a link to a Wikipedia page
here.
So the next part of multiple testing is
now that
we've defined the different error
measures, how do we actually
define a procedure that can be used to
control that error measure.
In other words, is there a way that we
could perform a prof, procedure such that
the rate of errors defined by that error
rate is held in check in a particular way.
So, first we're going to talk about
controlling the false positive rate.
And so, if P values are correctly
calculated, you
can actually just use the P values that
you've
calculated directly and call all P values
less than
sum threshold Alpha, where Alpha's between
zero and one.
To be significant, that will actually
control the
false positive rate at level alpha on
average.
In other words, the expected rate of false
positives is less than alpha.
So here's the problem with that.
Suppose that you perform say 10,000
hypothesis tests, this seems
a little bit extreme, a large number of
tests maybe.
For people that are doing just one or two
regressions but in many high dimensional
settings or signal
processing settings there are, this is
actually a reasonably
small number of hypothesis tests that
might be performed
and if you call all P values less than
0.05 say significance and we say alpha
equal to
0.05, then the expected number of false
positives is
just the total number of tests that you've
performed.
Times the false positive rate that you're
controlling the, error rate at.
And so you get 500 false positives.
So if you perform this many hypothesis
tests and you get 500 significant results,
it's pretty likely that they're mostly
going
to be made up of false positive results.
So a question that we immediately comes to
mind is how do we
control, a different error rate so that we
avoid so many false positives.
So the first choice is the family-wise
error rate.
And I talked about that just a minute ago,
which is we want to
be able to control the probability that
we're going to make even one error.
So the Bonferroni correction is actually
the approach for doing this.
And I've linked to the Wikipedia page
here.
It's actually the oldest multiple testing
correction.
>> And the basic idea is that if you are
doing m hypothesis tests
and you want to control the family wise
error rate at level alpha, in other
words we want to make sure, try to ensure
that the probability of making
even one error is even less than alpha, so
that's quite a stringent control there.
We can calculate all the p values
normally.
And then [UNKNOWN], take the alpha level
that we originally had for a single
hypothesis test and divide it by the
number of hypothesis tests that we
performed.
In other words if alpha is 0.05 and the
number of hypothesis tests
is ten then we get 0.05 divided by 10 is
equal to 0.005.
So then we get this new alpha level, and
we count,
call, all p values less thanum, this new
alpha level significant.
Then that will, on average, control the
family wise error rate.
The pros of this method are that it's easy
to calculate and you don't make a lot of
errors.
This is guaranteed to make very few errors
in the sense that this error rate,
which is the probability of even one false
positive, is actually controlled to be
quite low.
A con, though, is that it also may be
very, very conservative.
In other words, if you're doing a large
number of hypothesis tests,
controlling the probability of even one
false positive might be pretty extreme.
You might want to allow for a few pos,
false positives if
that will allow you to discover a lot of
more real signals.
So that's where the false discovery rate
comes in.
It's probably the most popular for error
rate or
multiple testing correction when
performing very many hypothesis tests.
These examples, like I said, came up in
genomics.
Imaging, astronomy or other signal
processing disciplines in particular.
But it also comes up in a lot of other
different places.
So the basic idea here is suppose you do m
hypothesis
tests, and you want to control the false
discovery rate at level alpha.
So the expected number of false
discoveries divided
by the total number of discoveries is
controlled.
You can think of this sort of as that
level of noise in the results.
So, if you have F, F, FDR of Alpha, you
expect to
have Alpha Percent of the things that you
are claiming to be false.
So, what you do is you just calculate the
P values
normally and then you order the P values
from smallest to largest.
And the way that we denote that is in
parenthesis,
we put the number that represents the
order of the P-Value.
So this is no longer the P value that we
calculated.
It's now the smallest P value that we
calculate.
And then we order them all the way up to
the mth P
value, so there are m hypothesis tests, so
this is the maximum P value.
Then you go through and for the ith order
P
value, you look to see whether there's
less than, or
equal to alpha times i divided by m, and
if
it's true, then you call it significant
and if not.
You don't, this then is procedure is
designed to control this false discovery
rate here.
The pros are that it's still pretty
easy to calculate like the Brom Brody
correction.
It's less conservative and maybe much less
conservative if there's a
lot of signal and you allow for just a few
false positives.
You might be able to find a lot more of
the real signals.
The cons are it does allow for more false
positives,
so if you let the error rate be very
large,
you might find a lot of false positives
among the
significant results, and it might also
behave strangely under dependence.
In other words.
If you perform hypothesis tests that are
related to each
other, say for example including different
sets of parameters in the
same regression model and trying out a
bunch of different regression
models you can get strange behavior of the
false discovery rate.
So, here I'm going to show you an
example of how these significance
calculations are performed.
Basically how the hypothesis tests are
performed for the different corrections.
And so I'm going to do this example of
with P-values.
And I'm going to control all of the error
rates
that we're going to be talking about at
the level 0.2.
So, here are the ten P-Values.
They're ordered by how small they are.
So this is the smallest P-Value up to the
tenth P-Value, which is the largest one.
And on the Y-Axis is the P-Value itself.
And so the red line represents all of the
P-Values that we would
call signficant at L Alpha equals 0.2, if
we did no correction at all.
So it's basically just all the P-Values
less than 0.2.
And so this, there's no correction
approach actually controls.
The false positive rate, but remember that
can lead to a
large number of false positives if you're
performing many hypothesis test.
So the next thing to look at is the false
discovery rate.
So this is controlling the proportion of
false positives at level of 0.2.
In other words, we expect about 0.2% or
sorry, about 20%
of all the results we call significant to
be false positives.
And so the way that this is calculated is
actually following this gray line.
So, we're going to order the P-Values from
smallest to largest and each time we're
going to
compare it to a a linear line where
the slope is determined by this alpha
level here.
And so, we actually would just call this
first three P-Values significant.
So we find three significant P-Values.
And we're controlling a slightly different
error measure.
Finally the Bonferroni correction, down
here is actually just taking 0.2
and dividing by 10, the number of
hypothesis that we're testing.
So in this case it's 0.02, is this line
straight across here.
And in this case we'd only dis, we've only
discovered these two or called these two
P-Values significant.
And all the rest we would call
insignificant.
Not significant.
But the Bonferroni correction here is
controlling
this much more stringent family wise error
rate.
So this hopefully shows you a little bit
about how the different procedures work,
sort of
conceptually in terms of where the
cut-offs are
drawn for different sorts of sets of
P-Values.
Another approach is to adjust the P-values
rather than to adjust the alpha level.
And so in this case, we're going
to calculate it's, what's called adjusted
P-values.
This is the, the reason why I bring up
this approach is because it's easy.
And sort of a direct calculation is
available in R.
Something to keep in mind is that once
you've
adjusted P-values, they are no longer
classically defined P-values.
In other words they don't have the same
properties
of classically defined P-values, and
shouldn't be treated that way.
But they can be used to control error
measures directly without adjusting the
alpha parameter [INAUDIBLE].
So, here's an example of how this might
work for the Bonferroni correction.
So, suppose we have these m P-values.
One thing that we could do is we could
adjust them by
calculating m times each P-value, and
taking the max of that and one.
So in other words the P-values can't be,
the adjusted P-values can't be larger than
one.
Just like the P-value themselves can't be
larger than one.
But we have multiplied every P-value by m.
So remember for the Bonferroni correction,
we
were going to divide the alpha level by m.
So if instead, we multiply the p value by
m, we can just calculate the number of
times our
new P-values are less than alpha and it
will give
you the exact same set of results that are
significant.
So in other words we can use
these, familiarized error rate or
Bonferroni adjusted P-values.
To calculate significance by comparing it
to the original
alpha level that we might have been
interested in.
In this case say, 0.05.
So if we multiply the P-values times the
number of tests performed.
And look at how many are less than alpha
then
we will control the familiarized error
rate at level alpha.
So here's an example with no true
positives.
So in this case, I've simulated a bunch of
data sets, so a 1,000 data sets.
In each case, I generate a normal y and
a normal x that have no relationship to
each other.
And then, I fiddled in your model relating
those to variables Y to X and I get
the coefficients of that I, I take the
summary
of that linear model and get the
coefficient matrix.
In that coefficient matrix in the second
row.
The fourth columns the P-value for the
relationship between y and x.
So I calculate the P-value for all 1000
different simulated examples.
And then I look at the number of P-values
less than 0.05.
So remember in none of these cases was
there actually a relationship between the
two variables.
But still we get 51 or about 5% of the
tests being
performed or called significant.
Even though there's no relationship.
So what happens if I, adjust the P-values
and apply
the false famiarlize wise error rate or
the false discovery rate.
So, for example.
What I can do is use the P.adjust function
in R, so I just say I apply
P.adjust to the P-value vector that I
calculated.
So this P-value vector has all the
P-values from all 1000 different studies.
P.adjust gets applied to that.
In the first case I say method equals
Bonferroni because I want to do the
Bonferroni correction.
And again, now that I've corrected the
P-values I
can just compare them to a standard alpha
level, in
this case 0.05 and I look at how many are
less than that and in this case there are
zero.
So, when there are no true positives we
find very few true significant results.
When we're controlling the famiarlize
area.
Which is good, we shouldn't find
any significant results because there's no
relationship.
Similarly, we can do the same thing, but
instead of controlling
using the Bonferroni Correction, we can
use what's called the Benjamini-Hochberg
Correction.
Which is that correction I just talked
about
a minute ago for controlling the false
discovery rate.
So I can again adjust the P-values and
then look at the numbers that are
less than 0.05, in this case again
we don't discover anything which is good
because.
There shouldn't be any discoveries in
the case that there's no significant
relationships.
So, I'm going to show another simple
simulated
scenario, and so in this scenario I'm
going to
have 50% of the time this is going to be a
relationship between the two variables.
So I'm going to simulate again one
thousand
different y and x variables for the first.
sets of variables.
I'm going to generate, a y value that's
independent of x.
For the last 500, I'm going to generate a
y value that has a
mean that's equal to 2 times x so there's
a relationship between y and x.
So the first 500 beta is equal to zero and
the last 500 beta is equal to two.
Again I calculate a P-value for each of
the cases.
And then I can define the true status to
be beta is equal to zero for the first
500.
And data is equal not, is not equal to
zero for the last 500.
Just so I can make a table and show what
the results are from this analysis.
So if we look at the number of P-values
that is
less than 0.05 by the true status this is
with no correction.
I see that for the case where the, there
is actually no relationship between
the two variables, I get again about 5% of
the time a false positive result.
And then in this case the signal's very
strong.
So I actually find that all of theuh,
P-values for
the cases where there is a relationship
are less than 0.05.
So I actually discover all of the, the
real signals that exist in this data set.
So if I use a familiarlize error rate, I,
again, adjust
now the P-values using p.adjust, apply to
the p value vector.
I set the method to be Bonferroni,
calculate
the number of times it's less than 0.05.
In this case, I actually discover slightly
fewer, significant results.
In other words I missed 23 of the cases
where there should be a signal.
But now I actually have no false
positives.
And that's because I'm again controlling
the probability of even
one false positive to be less than 0.05 in
this case.
In the case of the false discovery rate I
set the method to be equal to bh.
And what I discovered is that here I, I
do actually discovered all of this
significant results, but
I discover actually fewer false positive
results than I
would've discovered with out any kind of
multiple testing correction.
And in this case, actually about 5% of the
cases were actually called there to be a
true relationship.
Only about 5% of the time are the is there
not actually a true relationship.
So, in this case, I'm looking at the
percentage of the times that
they're actually equal to zero but we
claim that it's not equal to zero.
So the other thing that you can do, all of
this is not necessarily useful
for performing the hypothesis test, it's
useful
for kind of understanding what P
adjustment does.
So I can plot the P values versus the
adjusted P values corrected
for both the Bonfferoni method and the
Benjamin Hochberger, in the case of
Bonferoni.
What I'm doing is I'm just taking each P
value and multiplying it by
the number of tests that I perform, so in
this case, multiplying it by 1,000.
So, you can see the various smallest P
values are still less than one.
But then, after I get to this point here,
all the P
values multiplied by 1,000 are equal to
one or greater and so.
Since I don't allow the adjusted p-values
to be
greater than one, you just get a flat
line.
On the other hand with the benjamini
Hochberger probe,
you actually see this sort of increasing
function, so
the P value is on the x axis and the
adjsusted P value is on the y axis.
And you see that the adjusted P value is
slightly
larger across the entire range than the
actual P value itself.
But not dramatically larger, actually, for
this particular case.
Because you actually have a lot of
significant results.
So it's the notes and further resources.
So first the notes, multiple testing is
actually an entire sub field
and there's a whole bunch of different
corrections that you can possibly apply.
Depending on the different dependant
structures and all the different
sort of choices that you made in the
statistical model and.
So depending on your problem you might
want to do a little.
Further research on what's right
correction apply.
The basic Bonferroni or Benjamini Hochberg
Correction is usually enough for most sort
of standard problems but there's actually
if
there's strong dependence between the test
for
example you might want to consider method
equals BY in the p data chest function or
looking to more direct adjustments for the
dependents between the hypothesis tests.
This is actually an area in which I've
done a little bit of research,
so hopefully you can take a look at some
of my papers on the area.
So, for the resources are this is actually
quite a nice paper.
A gentle introduction to multiple testing
procedures with applications in genomics.
Which is an area I work in and where
multiple
testing has really flourished in terms of
a statistical discipline.
Similarly, the statistical significance
for genome wide
studies is a very nice gentle
introduction.
Introductions in terms of a paper to read.
again, it's focused on molecular biology
but it's pretty easy to read.
I think even if you're not an expert in
that area.
And finally this is a very nice sort of
introduction to multiple testing that goes
over to basics.
A lot of what I've covered now but may
be a little bit more depth in case you're
interested.